# Social-information-structures-real-time-aggressive-decision-making-in-monk-parakeets


Within social groups, individuals must make time-sensitive social decisions about who to fight, how aggressively to fight, and when to fight in order to navigate conflict. These decisions draw on a range of cognitive skills that allow individuals to integrate various sources of social information. While research has explored what kinds of social information group members are cognitively capable of using, it remains unclear how animals use this information to navigate real time social situations in active social settings. To understand social information use and its cognitive underpinnings in real time social settings, we investigated how captive monk parakeet (Myiopsitta monachus) groups used social information to respond to aggression on a fight-by-fight basis. We proposed five potential “time-dependent rules”: retaliation (bird attacks its most recent aggressor), pile-on (bird attacks the most-recent loser), pass-along (bird who has lost attacks another ranked lower than self), opportunism (bird attacks a recent loser who is higher ranked than self), and punishment (bird attacks an individual that just violated the rank order of aggression). Each rule requires different combinations of social information to utilize We used a total of 4660 aggressive events observed across three captive groups to analyze patterns of aggression sequences to determine how quickly the response motifs associated with each rule were executed, how this speed differed from random event timing, and to quantify how often each response motif was executed compared to expected levels after event order was randomized. We found that the birds executed the pile-on response motif significantly more frequently and faster than expected in all three groups, retaliation more frequently in two groups, and opportunism more frequently in one group, suggesting that they used experience, observation, and rank information to structure aggression. In contrast the birds executed the response motifs associated with the pass-along and punishment rules significantly less often than expected in three groups, and opportunism less often in one group, suggesting that experience and rank information could have been used to avoid certain social situations. Furthermore, these motifs tended to be executed slowly, which could indicate these social decisions were more complex. Characterizing rule use and avoidance can provide a window into how social information and its underlying cognition impact how group members make real time aggressive decisions in active social settings.

The data folder contains the raw interaction data used to detect each rule's motif, as well as data pertaining to bird ID, individual rank, and binning/timeline information 

The output folder contains summarized dfs concerning the quantification of motif execution (group and individual), as well as motif execution speed

Each group folder contains the response motif detection script for each time dependent rule, as well as the permuation based statistics used to analyze motif frequency and execution 

The Plots and stats Group 1-3 script contains the linear and earth movers statistics, as well as the figure code for motif frequency and execution speed for each social group. Every chunk besides the "Motif execution speed vs random violin plots" chunk can be run using the files provided in the output folder to bypass the long run times of the rule detection scripts. The "Motif execution speed vs random violin plots" chunk directly requires the randomized permutation output of the "Randomize Motif speed" and "Compare observed speed to random" code chunks of the rule detection scripts. These outputs were ommited from this repository due to file size restraints, so the rule detection scripts up to and including those two code chunks must be run first to run the "Motif execution speed vs random violin plots" chunk of the Plots and stats Group 1-3 script. All code chunks can be run after running each rule detection script for each group if desired.

The Supp mat observed motif count compared to random plots script contains the code for producing the supplemental figures of each rule's response motif frequency compared to random under each of the other three rule detection thresholds. Each rule detection script must be adjusted to the appropriate threshold (additional information within the group folders and the manuscript) and run before running this script
